I was at the MSC and at that time they had some counters in the cafe area and they were kind of horseshoe shaped.
And I happened to be sitting on one end of one of those horseshoes and there were some students nearby that I could overhear their conversation.
And I guess this was probably about my first semester here, or first year here.
And I overheard him say, that fellow Barker in psychology, he is chicken shit.
He says he never gives you the same test from one semester to another.
And he even gives different tests for different sections of the same course.
And I did face a problem there.
I didn't know whether the ethical thing for me to do was be to identify myself or not.
would be embarrassing to them either way.
So I just left soon after that without saying anything.
Did any in those early semesters, did anybody ever give you one of the memorable Aggie explanations for his grandfather dying on the test day or something like that?
I do remember somewhat later than my first years here, but I remember
I was walking across the campus and one of my students hailed me from a great distance about a block away.
He just yelled, everybody could hear it, Dr. Barker.
So I waited for him and he came running up and he said, I just wanted to tell you that San Antonio, I have to be in San Antonio Monday to be in court and so I won't be in class.
I said, well, I thank you for telling me that, but I noticed that you missed quite a few times and never said a thing about it.
Why are you telling me now?
And he said, well, this time I had an excuse.
Oh, that's good, that's good.
But I'm not complaining about attendance.
I think my attendance was exemplary.
But there were a few times I had people like that fellow from San Antonio, but that was pretty rare.
It was more common later when the university became larger.
In those early weeks, while you were here during the week by yourself,
Where did you eat?
Did you go to the movies?
What did you do for any kind of diversion?
Okay.
Of course that wasn't very long, just a few months, but I would work late at the office and I would come to the library where we are right now in this building.
Well, attached to this building.
And I would have meals at the MSC most of the time.
Sometimes I would go to a restaurant at the Northgate area.
There weren't any McDonald's or fast food chains here.
And the other cafes in town, I guess I ate at them at one time or another, all of them.
But most of my meals I took at the MSC.
So I was on the campus almost all the time.
And of course, it was a good thing, really, that I was
uh single and celibate in those days because uh i was really having to learn everything at once you know i'd had no even no time prior to the beginning of classes to to make lesson plans because i presume you were working almost every uh
non-class hour getting lectures ready.
That's right, I was.
But it was a very exciting time for me.
I never felt really strained by it, but I guess it was good that I didn't have many family responsibilities for that short time because I probably wouldn't have been able to catch on to it as quickly as I did.
Of those first courses, which one did you enjoy most?
I believe I enjoyed my, well, you were asking what I taught, and I said those undergraduate courses in test and measurement and those other, they all were classes of fair size, about 30 to 50.
But then I had one graduate course in test and measurements.
I believe there were only about eight in there.
And one of them was on the faculty.
It was Earl Kniebel.
You probably knew him.
He was already had a doctor's degree, even.
I don't guess he needed it for academic credit or anything.
But he just wanted to take that course.
And he performed exactly like any other student and did all the work, took all the tests.
And then I had some school teachers or administrators around here that came in.
It was a night class, evening class.
And I believe I kind of liked that one the best.
But I liked them all, Haskell, I really did.
I know that sounds kind of Pollyanna, but I absolutely did enjoy every class.
Each one was different.
The general psychology classes I liked because it was something different every day.
I mean, you cover the whole field of psychology in four months, so it can't get boring.
Now, the university at that time, or the college, it was the Agricultural Mechanical College of Texas,
had, didn't have authority to give a degree, even an undergraduate in psychology, but it did give an undergraduate degree in education and a master's?
Yes.
The master's was, and it included certification to be a school principal.
And there was also a master's that you could get a certificate to be a school counselor.
And I was involved in that program quite a bit.
And then
Yes, that's right.
Those were our masters.
And we didn't have any elementary education.
Now, they were all male.
Can you generalize any more about the students?
Did they tend to be urban, rural, Anglo?
Or was it kind of a cross-section of Texas?
Well, I think they were above average socioeconomic
I don't believe I had very many poor ones, but I don't know that I could tell, you know, the way they were at A&M and all in uniform and the way they were with each other, the way the attitude they had toward each other.
I don't know that I would know that, but I felt that they were, for the most part, from moderately well-to-do to very well-to-do.
families on the whole.
I later found out that was true.
You know, I later had some information about that that indicate that was true.
And maybe this would be a good time to mention to you that the first undergraduate black students that enrolled in A&M
were in my class, first two.
Let's hold that because we sure want to get to that.
That's in the summer.
In the summer, right.
They were at 7 a.m. on Monday morning.
Yes, yes, yes.
We want to get to that.
But I liked them.
I really did like them.
Yeah, we'll get to that.
I'm talking about the general students.
Oh, the general students.
Right.
Your grading policy, did you grade on the curve or anything?
Yes, I graded on the curve, like Warble taught me.
I adapted it to him, but I did.
And in those early years, did any student come and give you any sob story to try to talk you into a higher grade?
Oh, that happened, yeah, from time to time.
Any memorable excuses that they tried to offer?
I can't really think of any that were really memorable.
But it wasn't extremely common, but it did happen.
All right.
Now, those first weeks, you would leave then late on Friday and go to Austin to see family.
Right.
And then come back Sunday.
Sunday night, usually.
Sunday night.
And then about when did you learn that you had a continuing appointment?
I think that was late in the first semester.
I don't really have a clear recall of that, but it seems like about that.
You know, before Christmas, I think.
Before Christmas.
About Christmas.
And so, and then your wife tries to sell the house and they come over and... Let's see, that would be in the spring, you know, late winter of 1960.
Right.
Back here on the campus,
Hubert was the dean.
What did you see of the other senior administrators?
Earl Rudder, the president, Wayne Hall, the vice president, did you?
Well, I met all of them and, you know, had a speaking acquaintance with them.
But I really didn't have much business with any of them.
I just taught my classes.
What was your impression of Earl Rudder early?
I had a lot of respect for him and thought he was an able man.
And I thought he was reasonable.
I'd heard some criticism of him, and I didn't agree with that criticism.
Some people probably didn't know him, read that he was really kind of inflexible or kind of harsh and like that.
But I didn't find that at all.
Of course, I didn't have a lot of dealings with him.
By the way, I still have some family in Waco.
And years and years after, just not so many years ago, my brother-in-law, my wife's brother in Waco, and his wife said that they met somebody at a party in Waco.
And we mentioned that Don Barker, our relative, was on the faculty there.
And he said, well, I hired Don Barker.
And I said, well, who was it?
He said, well, it was a big, kind of quite a few people there, and we don't remember what his name was.
And I says, well, was it Grady Parker?
They said, no, that wasn't it.
Was it Walter Vorpahl?
They said, no.
And I said, well, could it have been Frank Hubert?
And I said, well, surely it wasn't Earl Rudder?
They said, no.
Because I wouldn't have thought Earl Rudder hired me.
I don't know that I had an interview with him on it.
And I said, well, I don't know who it could have been.
I said, just not even thinking it was a good guess.
It certainly wasn't Tom Harrington, was it?
He said, yeah, that's who it was.
How long was it before you encountered some of the basic Aggie traditions?
I guess the first day, probably.
I always heard about those.
Howdy was the most obvious one, and that's one that I missed.
I think it was such a good tradition.
But yeah, I heard them all along.
How long before you went to a football game or a silver taps or a Yale practice?
I didn't make the football games regular for a while since I was going back home on weekends.
And even after that, I didn't for a while.
Later, I became a very regular at all the sporting events.
But I think I went to silver taps the first time they had one.
Of course, they didn't have them as many as often then with a smaller enrollment.
I don't know if we had one the first semester or not, but certainly the first year I went to one.
Did that strike you as an appropriately positive?
Oh, I was so impressed.
Yeah, very impressed.
And I went to quite a few of them.
Did you go to Bonfire early?
Yes, I did.
And I never cared a whole great deal for those.
But especially it was when they used to have it over on the south side of the campus.
It was so near my house that it caused great traffic problems.
And I was afraid even safety problems.
So I never was very fond of Bonfire.
But I did attend a lot of them and took my children to them many times.
And we did have some good times on Bonfire Night, had company over after that.
bonfire since we were near there and so i had mixed feelings about it i was glad enough to see it move though to the polo grounds all right you uh then in the spring but i was into the traditions you know i was interested in them and and i asked about them you know and and it was was very i made sure that i got acquainted with that how long did it take you to feel like that you might be here a good while
Did you think in those terms early?
Yes, I did.
So you never were guilty of what I call the missionary complex, those people that act like they're doing A&M a favor just by being here?
Never.
And that they're looking at their watch to see?
No.
OK.
I knew when I first came that I was only employed as a one-year appointment.
And then during that year, I was told, no, you're a regular like anybody else.
We don't have tenure.
In fact, I never even heard of tenure.
I knew much about it.
But I never thought much about it.
I felt very secure in my employment because, well, I just didn't see any reason not to.
doing my work well, I thought, and was being told I was doing it well, and the students seemed to like me, and the other faculty members, I got along with them, and I didn't, I had very little contact with the administration, and I thought that was good.
I thought that was a good sign.
And I really thought it would be permanent, and by the way, one time,
I was in to see Dean Hubert when he was dean of whatever college we were in at that time, and on some other matter.
And he said, oh, by the way, we're going to start having something called tenure here, and you've got it.
That makes some people mad to hear that I received tenure that way.
Well, if I'm not mistaken, all of us under an act of the legislature who had more than seven years or more.
We grandfathered in, huh?
We were grandfathered in.
At the end of your first year or somewhere near the end of your first year, did you get the impression you had been evaluated?
Did anybody call you in or write you a letter to tell you you had done this or not done that?
No, it was done verbally, and I remember one time during my first year in a faculty meeting, Grady Parker said to the faculty, don't you all think Don Barker has fit in real good here and doing a good job?
And they all applauded real loud and patted me on the back.
And it was one of the best feelings that I've ever had.
That is good.
And I thought that was good as tenure.
Yes, yes.
I agree.
All right, then you all moved into a house in the spring semester or early summer?
Yeah, a rented house that time on Carter Creek.
And we were only there about a year.
OK.
Were you churchgoers?
We took our children to church at the Cavett Avenue Baptist Church.
And I joined that church, too.
All right.
And how did you and wife and family, how did y'all make close friends here?
Well, it was mostly through our children.
That's the way it was.
When we moved here, Becky, well, see, Laura was about,
Let me see.
The younger one, Becky, was only about three or four years old, and Laura was about five or six, something like that.
And so they, that's how we met everybody, you know.
They would play with the neighbor children, and we'd hear about them, and then we'd meet their parents.
Almost everybody, I was known mostly as Laura's daddy or Becky's daddy.
That was how I knew most people.
other than on the campus.
And you all bought a house that was about what age?
It was new.
We didn't build it, but it had been built.
And then they started the NM Consolidated, your children did.
What was your impression in those early years of the NM Consolidated schools?
Well, we were very pleased with them.
So were we.
Very pleased.
About when were there some reorganizational changes that began to make important impression on education?
Well, in the one that I was involved in a whole lot that really affected my career a
was about 19, I think about 1963 or 64.
And even just in those three or four years, the programs had grown a lot.
And we were approved to have a PhD in education.
And that would be to include educational administration and curriculum instruction.
And that curriculum instruction was quite a catch-all.
science education, the English education, and a lot of different things could come under that umbrella.
And I was designated to be the director of the doctoral programs in education.
And that was a new program for us, and so I had to plan it and organize it, along with other people, of course.
Hubert was involved in that a lot, and of course, Paul Hensling very, very much.
As far as you know, who were the prime movers
in that proposal and getting it approved in Austin?
Well, Paul Hensley had a whole lot to do with it, and so did Frank Hubert.
And I do believe Earl Rutter was very strongly in favor of it.
We already had a doctoral program in industrial education.
Another department, Chris Gronemann, was in that.
And he was very supportive in that.
And by the way, our doctoral program even included ag ed at that time.
And physical ed included, too.
I didn't mention that.
Health education, too.
So I believe those that I'm in.
Paul Hensling and Frank Hubert and Earl Rutter.
And let's see.
We had several graduate college deans along about then.
Wayne Hall was one of them.
And there's another one.
George Kunze.
Oh, well, no.
That was before him.
Right.
Well, no, he follows Hall.
Well, who preceded Hall?
Well, he's before you and me.
Oh, uh-huh.
Because Bill Barzac was the associate dean of the graduate school.
I was the assistant.
And Hall was vice president and graduate dean.
And then they brought in Coonsey to be the first graduate dean only.
Well, Wayne Hall was supportive in the effort.
And of course, all the department heads were very much involved in it, not just Paul Hensling, but like Earl Kniebel, I believe.
Well, let's see.
I think he was the head then.
And Tischler, I believe it was, over in physical education before Carl Landis.
Or maybe Carl Landis was head by that time.
And then, let's see, the curriculum and instruction, I don't remember who was ahead then, but they would definitely be involved.
They were the bulk of it.
Do you remember some of the first students in that doctoral program?
Oh, yeah.
Who were some of those?
Well, one of them was, well, the very first one to graduate was Campbell Mograbi.
And he was from Jordan.
I don't know how he landed here exactly.
Can you spell Mugrabi?
I think so.
M-O-G-R-H-A-B-I.
And then the superintendent, later became superintendent of schools, I think he already was in the school administration, Wesley
Summers, Wesley Summers.
He was one of our first graduates.
Who recruited those?
John Hoyle was among the first two.
Okay.
Who recruited those students?
Was there anybody that went out and made an effort to?
Well, we all did.
We put out some publishing materials and sent it to all the other colleges and to a lot of the high schools and a lot of professional organizations.
We had things appear in the newspapers and
professional publications in the various fields.
And we had meetings on the campus of some educators' conferences.
But I would say that Paul Hensling had a whole lot.
That was his strong point, by the way, was public relations or publicity and that kind of thing.
Describe his background before you got to A&M.
Where had he been?
What had he done?
He came here as he had been assistant superintendent in Port Arthur.
I believe that was right before he came here.
No, it was Aldine.
He was superintendent, I think, in Aldine.
And before that, he was assistant superintendent down in your neck of the woods, Port Arthur.
And he had had special training in the field of educational administration that has to do with public relations and publicity.
And so he was always very much involved in that.
So he had ways of pushing that.
We had lots of applicants, you know, from the very beginning.
The program grew rapidly.
Too rapidly, I think.
Or faculty to staff it.
And the school of, as the name is changed to Texas A&M University in 64 and 5, then what had been the School of Arts and Sciences is changed.
Describe what happened that related to y'all.
Well, I don't remember exactly how.
It was kind of fuzzy in my mind.
It never really affected me much.
You know, I just kept teaching my courses in testing and measurements.
I didn't continue to teach those general psychology courses very long.
My second semester I started teaching statistics, I believe.
I don't remember teaching the first.
And from then on, every semester I taught one or two or maybe more, but usually at least always at least one course in statistics.
And what was the general content of that?
I tried to get into that.
enough that would be useful to a person that didn't take any other course in statistics.
Try to make it an in course for some people.
But also try to make it so it would be an entry to go in further in statistics.
That was a pretty tough thing to do, but that's what I tried to do, and I think I did accomplish that.
So I came to be teaching statistics as my main subject, really.
And that got me into a lot of trouble because I was called on to be on almost every committee.
I estimate I was over 1,000 committees in every department, not just my own department.
And then another thing that happened is back in those days, that was long before personal computers.
And it was kind of tricky to get into the computer.
You know, everybody shared the same computer.
And I happened to be one of those that
was anointed to be a gatekeeper for the computer.
And so that's how I spent many of my days and some of my nights helping people run things through the computer for statistical analysis primarily.
How long before you directed some dissertations and theses?
The very first time we had it, you know, I think it was 63 or 64, I immediately started to do that.
I was the chairman for Camel Mog Robbie.
Okay.
So you were the chairman for the first one.
That's right, and many others.
But I really didn't, I tried to keep it so that I didn't share
too many committees, but I was on lots of committees.
That's the way it turned out.
But I did chair a lot of them too.
Describe Frank Hubert's role in leading education forward so skillfully.
Describe him as a person from the faculty member's point of view and so forth.
Make believe I'd never seen him or knew anybody.
That's kind of hard to do.
Make believe I'm a stranger.
Well, actually, I never had just a real close personal relationship with him.
He was a little bit, in my mind, distant.
But I always had tremendous respect for his ability.
I always thought that he knew what he was doing and he knew how to do it.
We were in real good hands.
I never doubted that at all.
And I always thought, too, that if I did have a problem,
at that level, that I could go to him and he would listen, you know, and he would be fair.
It didn't happen very often.
I didn't get to test it much, but I, my impressions of him are very positive.
Now, I have heard some
criticism mostly from people that didn't know him as well as I did, you know, he's very, not very friendly or kind of ruthless maybe even, something like that.
But I don't believe that at all.
That does not fit my knowledge of him at all.
As far as you know, he was well informed.
Absolutely.
And I think he had the welfare of the university and the college and the department always at heart.
And who was his key secretary?
That would be Peggy Ritchie.
And was she well organized?
Absolutely, very well organized.
You know the answer to that, huh?
Yes, yes, yes.
I still see Peggy occasionally.
I haven't interviewed her, but I'm writing that she's one of the people that I really want to get to.
In your first years...
I see Willis once in a while, too, her husband.
In your first years here, who were the key assistant or associate deans?
Let me see.
You mean in my field or in any field?
In my field.
There weren't as many then, of course.
Hmm.
But at first, he was doing it himself.
And then later, he gets McCandless.
But that's a good while.
Yeah, that's right.
He had McCandless.
And then McCandless went with arts.
And when it was divided into liberal arts and education, well, McCandless went with liberal arts.
At one time, Lannis Holt was in the dean's office.
And let's see.
And, of course, Lannis and I have been real good friends all along.
He came shortly after I did.
And, of course, he was not teaching in our department, but part-time.
He was in the Counseling and Testing Center.
Same way with Austin Curley.
And he also had some Waco background.
That's right.
Yes, he did.
Now, am I correct that what had been Arts and Sciences was divided
And into liberal arts but that first included education.
Yes, that's right.
With Hubert.
Yes.
Then that was divided and liberal arts became a separate unit and Hubert stayed with education.
That's correct, that's right.
And by, you all were still officing in the academic building but his office was downstairs
then in academic, wasn't it?
The dean of arts and, dean of education.
Didn't.
I don't remember, let me see, Dean Hubert, I remember him mostly being over here in Bolton Hall pretty early.
Nagel.
Nagel too?
But at one time he was in.
Was he in Bolton?
No, no, not Bolton.
What is this building we're in now, the other end of it?
Cushing?
Cushing, yes.
He was in Cushing.
A lot.
But I think I remember for a while he was at the east end of the first floor of Academic.
I don't remember that, Haskell.
When a young man named Cole was his errand runner, I think.
I don't remember that, but it could very well be.
And then we, for a while, we moved to, I believe it is Bolton Hall that we did move to for a while.
Is it over here by the Century Oak?
Right, we were in there for a while.
My office was in there.
And then for a while our departmental office, I was still there, and our departmental office was in this little red building over here, right off the parking lot of the academic building.
I can't remember.
Bagley, I think.
Yeah, Bagley Hall.
In the early 60s,